...aimed specifically at the rice owls was
simple. The head yell leaders ask,
quote, what comes out of a Chinaman's eyes?
Question mark, quote. And then the
maroon student, the maroon section, Everyone
sitting in the rune section yelled back, rise,
rise, rise.
Similarly,
the tradition of a, quote, court trip,
where all members of the Corps of Cadets
went in alternate years to the Aggie football
games in Houston or Austin
and Dallas or Fort Worth.
Hitchhiking, we're getting there by
hitchhiking,
riding the train or buses, crowding into 10 to 12
youngsters
into individual hotel rooms,
sleeping on the floor at a friend's house, and or
reaching their destination just as the march
began for the whole corps
headed down Main Street in Houston,
Congress Avenue in Austin,
are the main thoroughfires in Dallas and Fort
Worth.
In fact, I had literally prayed
for God's help in finding
a good faculty appointment
But had asked. For his assistance. And not sending
me. To either Baylor. Or.
A&M
Prince up paragraph part of that. Negative
feeling. Began to disappear.
What one of the major steps? And the
disappearance. Of that negative feeling toward
A&M.
Came with the appointment.
to
the Aspirations Committee,
a part of what was labeled the Century Study.
That study was the
climax of a plan
instituted instigated by some key former
students
and others who yearn for A&M to become more of a pace
setter in higher education first in the state and
then possibly even at the national level.
One of the first steps in that dream had been the
recruitment of Earl Rudder as president. But now
the idea was for
some people, a large number of people, faculty,
staff, former students and others, to begin to
dream of what the Agricultural Mechanical
College of Texas could become by the time of its
centennial anniversary in 1976. I
was appointed to the Aspirations Committee,
particularly to the segment of that group to look
at Resident Instruction and Student Life, RISL.
In hindsight,
it is pleasantly astonishing to note that I was
just about the only junior faculty member in that
group,
which included all
of the other key campus leaders, deans, senior
faculty member, directors,
and the most recognized faculty.
As the junior person in the room, in years,
faculty rank and accomplishments,
it was easy to understand how I became the
secretary
and note-taker for RISL.
Soon we began the routine to meet every Tuesday
afternoon, almost every Tuesday afternoon, for
18 months.
As we tried to plan our pathway
many quote working parties quote were appointed
to review specific
topics
including such notable issues as co-education
racial integration, admission requirements,
the Corps of Cadets, intramurals, student life,
campus housing,
curriculum,
et cetera.
At least one member of the RISL committee served
with each working party, so there was splendid
collaboration
and communication.
Paragraph. Among the most interesting of those
groups was the working party that tried to
understand
more clearly
the status of A&M as it was perceived by Texas high
school students.
That group led by Bardin, B-A-R-D-I-N, Nelson, a
highly respected professor of rural sociology
was able to survey almost
all the high school juniors and seniors in a 32
county area extending from Conroe just north of
Houston
in an arc up to East Dallas through East Texas, up
through East Texas to the eastern edge of Dallas.
He and Harold Brown,
one of Dr. Nelson's young colleagues who happen to
live directly across the street from us on Bolton,
in the Eastgate area
placed before these students questions
which included inquiries about all of the eight
major institutions in the state including SMU,
TCU, Texas Tech, Baylor, Rice, the University of
Texas, TSCW,
the University of Texas at Austin, and A&M.
They had to ask questions about all of the schools
in order to gain access to the students.
who had no idea that this was an A&M
effort.
They learned quickly that this survey quickly
reflected
the fact that the average student had a very
limited knowledge of the academic areas offered
at A&M. other than agriculture, engineering, and
veterinary medicine.
These prospective undergraduates were
particularly unaware that majors were offered at
College Station in the humanities, social
sciences, business, education, et cetera.
They also were well aware that
A&M required every student to be male
and to serve in the Corps of Cadets for the first two
years.
One young man, one anonymous young man,
summarized his view in an unforgettable style.
When he wrote, no girls, no fraternities, no fun,
dash, no way, period, quote.
On a far more positive basis, when the students
were asked to identify the, quote,
most outstanding schools in the state.
They responded. Their responses were rice. 72% of
them identified rice as one of that trio. Texas
followed with 71 and A&M was third with 58. Then
there was a surprisingly large gap to the number
four choice SMU at 32%. Thus,
A&M had the great advantage of having a
comparatively strong profile for quality,
but the difficulty of a lack of perception of what
it offered. Another impressive result of the
questionnaires was the overwhelming
correlation between the students' class rank and
other quality measurements
and the absence of any interest by that student in
going to an all-male institution.
Perhaps that can be phrased better as the strong
correlation between the students with high
grades and class rank and their desire to go to a
coeducational school.
They were not, the best students were not
interested in going to an all-male institution
such as A&M or all-female such as the Texas State
College for Women. Similarly, there was also a
very clear link between the
achieving students
and their
lack of interest in anything that was compulsory
are required.
Our SL work also caused us to look at A&M's official
admission requirements
and we learned that in fact those
requirements included prohibited
anyone
with quote, a felony conviction, quote, or a
quote, communicable disease, period, quote.
Then, other than being white
and male,
each applicant had to have simply
a high school diploma. There were no
requirements
of class rank,
special courses
and or admission scores.
Obviously,
That non-selective
set of criterion permitted many students to
enroll who were not well prepared
for the rigor
of college studies.
After many months of hearing working party
reports, studying their findings,
and trying to look to the future,
the RISL group met.
And in what we later agreed was a truly
unforgettable day,
we voted on what our general recommendations
would be in
the aspirations report.
Meanwhile, we were teasing our friends on the
research and extension segment of the century
study
because it seemed to us that they simply had the
easy task of recommending, quote, more and better
of everything.
During our deliberations, we had long agreed that
we were to keep
all of the reports, our deliberations, and any
tentative recommendations in the conference of
the committee's meeting room.
Similarly, without agreeing upon such policy, we
did not discuss with our committee colleagues
our personal leanings.
One reason for that reservation became obvious
later when most of us admitted that we had feared we
were the only one, that we were in a small majority
of the committee
who would vote in favor of change.
That apprehension proved to be without
foundation. when on one momentous day the
RISL committee voted
in what I believe, now recall, was a unanimous
decision
to favor
making the Corps of Cadets optional to admit
women,
terminate racial integration,
broaden the curriculum into an increasing
horizon
of disciplines,
and add many more graduate and professional
programs.
As that session terminated and we walked away,
we seemed to reflect proud
and optimistic
caution.
Dash, because we wondered what
the true decision makers would recommend.
Another
vote we took was to recommend that the title of the
Agricultural and Mechanical College be changed.
We had looked at other land grant institutions
during the period of the century study
and had invited
Individuals familiar with those institutions to
come and give us the benefit of their experience
and judgment.
These guests included. Mark
Eric Walker, the president of Pennsylvania State
University.
and Dr. Derwood T. Verner, the number two man
at Michigan State University,
who had compiled a marvelous record at A&M in the
class of 1940.
a native of Cottonwood, Texas, a small crossroads
junction near Abilene. He was Woody Varner to all
Aggies. And he described for us how
what had been the Michigan State College of
Agriculture
had within
a decade and a half following World War II become
Michigan State University,
as it notably ascended in quality and fame.
As we reviewed the separate land grant
institutions,
we learned that a number of those schools had once
been titled
for their state, plus the words Agricultural and
Mechanical College, and then became
the
capital letter State University
in their state. Thus, we recommended that the
title of the separate land grant school for Texas
be changed from the Agricultural Mechanical
College of Texas to Texas State University,
a title which we thought had worked, a shift which
we thought had worked well in Oklahoma, Kansas,
Mississippi,
in comparatively recent years.
Being the secretary of the committee, it became my
responsibility to actually write and phrase the
committee's findings,
report, and recommendations for transmission
to the campus administration. In that role, I was
reporting to Dr. Wayne C. Hall,
a marvelously talented scholar in plant
pathology who was then the vice president for
academic affairs and dean of the graduate school.
When we completed our report, we turned it in.
And we're a bit surprised to learn that instead of
perhaps thousands of copies of the
recommendations being made for statewide
distribution, that there would be only four
copies and they would be kept under very guarded
and kept in very guarded privacy. Within a few
days, I was summoned, received a call to report to
Dr. Hall, and he handed me a copy of the report,
which he said had been read by President Rutter,
who had annotated it and added a number of
questions.
Dr. Hall then asked me to quote, revise the report
to bring it in line with President Rutter's wishes
and to get it back to him as soon as I could do so. As I
turned the pages, I noticed such statements as no
way, hell no, where did you get this stuff? can't do
it.
Thus, with a troubled fear in my mind and deep
concern in my heart, I returned to the vice
president's office
and attempted to tell him but I could not in good
faith make most of those changes.
He inquired why I could not do so, and I told him it
was because President Rutter was disagreeing in
most instances with the committee's
subjective judgments. which I verified might be
incorrect. But the committee did truly believe
that unless we modified the policies of
segregation,
of sexual
unless we modified the power.